# Relational Esthetics

## Concept

*Relational Esthetics* is a case study concerning the intersections of art, politics, and urbanism in a single European country, in this case Albania. This case study has chosen, for reasons that will explained below, to anchor its data to the career of Albanian artist–politician Edi Rama, and the development of the network of national and international artists, architects, politicians, and businessmen around him, from his first voyage to an art residence in Paris, 1993, to his ascendance as Prime Minister in 2013 and his current reign.

The aim is to provide insight into this network, its development over time, and the different clusters of intersecting artistic, political, and business interests. The intertwining of these interests in Rama's career can be traced back to his first intervention as Mayor of Tirana into the public Space of Tirana through the project "Greening and Painting, started in 2000, in which the grey façades of socialist 5-floor housing blocks were painted in bright colors. The documentation of this political intervention with artistic means into the urban landscape was documented by Anri Sala in his video work *Dammi i colori*, which was subsequently featured in the traveling curatorial project "Utopia Station" of Hans-Ulrich Obrist, Molly Nesbit, and Rirkrit Tiravanija in 2003-2004. At the occasion of the 2nd Tirana Biennial in  2003, Hans-Ulrich Obrist, one of the curators, remarked that he wanted the biennale to have a *real impact* on the city. It is the question of this real impact of art on the urban environment through political power that the Relational Esthetics attempts to clarify.

The idea for the Relational Esthetics database first developed from an interest in the precise role and function of a specific group of artists and curators, developing work in Albania since the first Tirana Biennials, and who later, when Rama had become Prime Minister, became involved in several cultural initiatives. This movement of artists – mainly sheltered under the curatorial umbrella of Hans-Ulrich Obrist – has been generally known under "Relational Aesthetics" or "Relational Art" after the term coined by Nicholas Bourriaud. The question was very simple: why, of all political situations, would they choose the Albanian one to operate in? Can we conclude something about their notoriously vague statements on politics once we inspect their allegiance to an Albanian politician?

The Relational Esthetics database provides a partial answer to that question, in the sense that it illustrates the way in which a cultural and artistic system are intimately related to and implicated in political and business networks, and instrumentalized for the pursuit of power. This happens, even if, as in the case of the Relational Aesthetics movement, the political affiliation of their work is purposefully opaque. It is perhaps in this opaqueness we ned to seek the answer for their allegiance to Edi Rama's "project."

## Historical Overview

Historically, one of the reasons that architecture and construction are so intertwined with Albanian politics, is that in absence of a well functioning local taxation system, building permits were and still are one of they few direct sources of revenue for municipalities.

The line of artistic and cultural projects included follows naturally from the first contact of Albanian post-socialist culture with contemporary art, starting concretely with two exhibitions in 1998, "Mediterranea N. 1" and especially "Onufri 1998 – Permanent Instability," curated by Albania's trail-blazing curator, Edi Muka. Edi Rama, in his first role as Minister of Culture, was essential here. He realized the potential of contemporary art in reshaping Albanian cultural life, as well as a tool to gain political credit. At the same time, his position, first as minister and later as mayor, allowed him to shield both Edi Muka and Gëzim Qëndro, the director of the National Gallery, from the persistent attacks of the now dethroned eminences in art.

## Methodology

Following the aim of this database to visualize the development of a close connection between art, politics, and urbanism in Albania since the fall of Communism following the career of Edi Rama, the projects that have been included are directly or indirectly related to the advent of his career as artist, politician, and urbanist. Considering his nearly consecutive periods as Minister of Culture, Youth, and Sports (1998–2000), Mayor of Tirana (2000–2011), and Prime Minister (2013–), his influence on the developments in these domains, and their increased complexity are tightly related to his own career. Thus, the Relational Esthetics database does not intend to be a fully representative overview of the developments in above fields, but is certainly a clear illustration of the evolving relation between arts, politics, and urbanism, especially after 2000.

Data regarding artistic and cultural projects were gathered from institutional websites, [e-flux Announcements](http://www.e-flux.com/announcements/), and [ArtFacts](http://www.artfacts.net/index.php).

Architectural and urban planning data were gathered from the legally sanctioned announcements placed next to construction projects, and the [database of construction permits](http://www.akpt.gov.al/Tpi_Permits.aspx) and [architecture competitions](http://competitions.planifikimi.gov.al/) at the website of [AKPT](http://www.planifikimi.gov.al/). Additional information was gathered at the [Albanian Construction Portal](http://acp.al/), the Albanian Forum on [Skyscrapercity](http://www.skyscrapercity.com/forumdisplay.php?f=1346), the websites of different architectural companies. Inclusion in the database was based on the following criteria: 1) funded with public money; 2) actively involving public institutions; 3) landmark objects designed by international architecture studios or project built in the context of local masterplans. Due to a lack of archival materials and a nearly completely absent historiography of architecture in Albania over the last twenty years, the data presented here cannot be but lapidary, especially in the earlier years of Rama's period as mayor. However, we feel these data are representative of general trends.

Data regarding construction companies was gathered from Open [Corporates Albania](http://open.data.al/sq/corporates/list/)

## Presentation of the Data

As Albanian politics and business is primarily a personal affair, all institutions and companies have been identified by the person that leads it, i.e., Ministers, Mayors, CEOS. In case of architecture studios, those partners who have engaged personally with presenting and supervising their projects.

## Who we are

*Relational Esthetics* is research project by [Vincent W.J. van Gerven Oei](http://www,vangervenoei.com/). The contents of this site have profited immensely from the contributions of Gëzim Qëndro, Neritan and Linda Sejamini, xxxxxx. Design and visualization by xxxx. We thank the team of the [New World Summit](http://www.newworldsummit.eu) for the donation of the website address.
