---
name: Giancarlo Politi
type: curator
country: Italy
tagline: Founder of Flash Art Magazine
description:
related-persons:
connections:
layout: person
---
Giancarlo Politi, the founder of FlashArt, left one of his first marks in contemporary art with the organization of Aperto '93 at the 45th Venice Biennial, which included many young artists that would later form the "Relation Aesthetics" movement and cluster around curator Hans Ulrich Obrist.

He came to Tirana for the first time in 1998, in the context of the *Mediterranea N. 1* exhibition curated by his neighbor, Gaetano Grillo. He later that year co-curated the Onufri 1998 exhibition with Edi Muka, both in the period Edi Rama was Minister of Culture. In 2001 he co-curated the first Tirana Biennial, but left the Albanian scene after failing to move the Tirana Biennale to Prague in 2003 and a rather comedic court case over the copyright on the name Tirana Biennale in 2005.

Nevertheless, when Edi Rama was elected Prime Minister in 2013, Politi wrote the following in [FlashArt newsletter](http://lists.c3.hu/pipermail/artinfo/2013-June/010399.html):
>Artist Edi Rama is officially Prime Minister of Albania

>Let's hope that Tirana will now become a world capital for art, with
studios and low-cost housing for artists, critics and gallerists from
around the world.

>After an overwhelming victory with an absolute majority, artist Edi
Rama is the new Prime Minister of Albania. With an aggressive,
intelligent and very motivated election campaign, Edi Rama, who had
already flirted with success in previous elections, has this time
out-matched his opponent, gaining an absolute majority.

>We wish our friend Edi all the best, especially during this
economically precarious time. But apparently Albania is one of the
few European countries experiencing growth. We therefore ask our
longtime friend, who yesterday morning, by telephone, confirmed his
overwhelming victory, to make Tirana a capital of the European art
world. Edi, who over a decade ago, as the mayor of Tirana,
transformed the gray city into a festive multi-hued landscape. A
painter himself, he had the facades of Tirana's buildings painted a
variety of colors; this metamorphosis also became a video produced in
conjunction with Anri Sala-his fellow student and artistic
colleague-that was first shown at the Venice Biennale in 2003.

>Artist Edi Rama, now Prime Minister of Albania, still loves art and
always considers himself an artist (in January this year, with Anri
Sala, he opened a beautiful exhibition at Rudiger Schoettle in
Munich). We ask him, because we know that it is possible, to
transform an area of Tirana into an affordable neighborhood where
creativity can be fostered, where artists, critics, curators and
gallery owners can live and build a sustainable community, creating
galleries, nonprofit spaces and open studios. In short, a haven for
artists and art lovers who want to experience art, its problems and
contradictions. Like Berlin, except in a sunny Mediterranean climate.

>We know that Edi Rama would like to do this. And more importantly, he can.
